---
title: Going beyond the Github Actions 6 Hour Job Limit
date: 18/09/2023
tags: [CICD, Github Actions]
featured_image: images/pexels-spacex-586030.jpg
---

Github Actions is a handy CICD system conveniently built into Github
and nicely integrated with the rest of the source code management side of the
house.  It's pretty flexible and can be trigger in numerous ways and
workflows can be connected together to suit a variety of use cases.  
Components of various complexity can be broke out and shared as well.
It's really nice stuff and way better than the bad old days of managing a
sketchy Jenkins node, but it does have a few limitations.

One such limit is a 6 hour maximum time a job is allowed to run.  After
that, the job will be unkindly killed and the workflow likely will be
marked as failed.  This applies not only if you are using the Github hosted runners,
but also for self hosted runners as well.

For quick builds and tests this isn't an issue, but on occasion you may run
into use cases where you really need something to be able to work beyond this
limitation.

By leveraging some features of Github Actions and a few shell tricks, I'll
demonstrate one such way to work around this.

Today we will cover:

* Job dependencies
* Job outputs
* Controlling job time with `timeout`
* Saving and restoring artifacts
* Other considerations

# Job Dependencies

A Github Actions workflow is made up of one or more job that contains one or
more steps.  The six hour limit for Github Actions is for the cumulative time
of a single job.  We can use this to our advantage and string together
multiple jobs.

Github Actions handles job dependencies by using the
[needs](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions#jobsjob_idneeds)
syntax.  For example I may have two jobs try1, and try2.  I can make try2
depend on and wait for try1 by adding the following to the try2 job:

```
  try2:
    needs: try1
```

For complex workflows, it is possible to have a list of dependencies, or to
make execution depend on an 'if' block.  Let's leverage that ability in the
next step.

# Job Outputs

We would now like to be able to control if our next job executes based on a value
from a step in our current job.  We we can set environment variables and
refer to these within a job like so: 

```
    - name: Set env var
      run: echo "MYVAR='1234'" >> $GITHUB_ENV
```

This won't quite work for us though.  Subsequent jobs will not have access to this environment, and there are
various other restrictions on what context you can refer this this var. Instead, we need to look into setting outputs.  

First we need to set the output from a step within a job:

```
    - name: Set step output
      id: mystep
      run: echo "done=true" >> $GITHUB_OUTPUT
```

This syntax mirrors the environment variable setting syntax, but here
we indicate that this is a step output.  We will want to refer to this
particular step later, so we specify an id of `mystep` as well.

At this point we can refer to our output like so `steps.mystep.outputs.done`.
We can use this in any way we would normally use a Github
[context](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/learn-github-actions/contexts)
such as in logic statements, or other references.

This still is not referrable outside of this job, however.  We will need to
explicitly indicate that our job has outputs as well.  For example:

```
  try1:
    outputs:
      done: ${{ steps.mystep.outputs.done }}
```

At this point we can now refer to the outputs from the job `try1` from our
subsequent jobs that we setup with our dependencies above.  

Let's make our second job execution conditional:

```
  try2:
    if: needs.try1.outputs.done == 'false'
    needs: try1
```

Now the job `try2` will only execute if the output of job `try1` is set to the
string 'false'.  Note that this output is available from the
[needs context](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/learn-github-actions/contexts#needs-context).
Without specifying the job in `needs` we will not have access to this job
output.

Okay, we have our basic flow sorted, now how will we run or skip subsequent
jobs based on a timeout?

# Controlling job timeout

Github Actions does not have a direct way of exiting out of a job after a
specific amount of time.  Luckily the GNU coreutils timeout command can help
us here.  This command will let us set a max wait time for a command and will
send a signal after the specified timeout.  This is quite configurable and
will allow us to determine if we want to preserve the original command status,
send a different signal besides the default SIGTERM, or if a subsequent
SIGKILL will be sent.

A simple example:

```
$ timeout 30s sleep 90
```    

We will want to get a bit fancier and combine this with our output setting
step above:

```
    - name: Set step output
      id: mystep
      run: timeout 300m ./longcommand.sh && echo "done=true" >> $GITHUB_OUTPUT || echo "done=false" >> $GITHUB_OUTPUT
```

In the above example, we set a max timeout of 300 minutes for the script
`longcommand.sh`.  If this times out `done` is set to 'false' if we don't time out
`done` is set to 'true'.  This is a simple example and you may wish to have
more complex logic here.

Note that the timeout is set to 300 minutes, not 360 minutes.  Recall that the
max job timeout is for the entire job, including any job setup, cleanup, and
storage.  Here we have added an amble buffer.

Now our step output, and therefore our job output setting will be dynamically
set based on the results of this command.

# Saving and Restoring Artifacts

In some scenarios, we may wish to conditionally save our work in progress if our job was
interrupted, but to do something different if our work is complete.  This can
be accomplished by leverage the workflow artifact storage feature, while
referencing our outputs we setup above.  For example:

```
      - name: Success!
        if: steps.mystep.outputs.done == 'true'
        run: |
          echo "Success we are done!"

      - name: Saving work.
        if: steps.mystep.outputs.done == 'false'
        uses: actions/upload-artifact@v3
        with:
          name: inprogress
          path: ./work
          retention-days: 2
```

Our downstream job can then restore this artifact before we restart our work:

```
      - name: Restore inprogress work
        uses: actions/download-artifact@v3
        with:
          name: inprogress
```

# Other Considerations

A full example of the concepts above can be found [here](https://github.com/kubilus1/actions6hour/blob/main/.github/workflows/6hour.yml).

Depending on the logic of our jobs, and the number of dependent job runs for your
use case, it may make sense to capture some of this in a [reusable workflow](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/reusing-workflows) or perhaps a [composite action](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/creating-actions/creating-a-composite-action).  That'll be a discussion for another day.

